Airflow review (in progress) (#506)
moj-analytical-services/user-guidance: source/documentation/services/airflow/index.md

## Overview

[Apache Airflow](https://airflow.apache.org/) is a workflow management platform. Analytical Platform users primarily use it for:

* automating data engineering pipelines
* training machine learning models
* reproducible analytical pipelines ([RAP](https://analysisfunction.civilservice.gov.uk/support/reproducible-analytical-pipelines/))

We recommend using it for long-running or compute intensive tasks. 

> Workflows are executed on the Analytical Platform's Kubernetes infrastructure and can interact with services such as Amazon Athena, Amazon Bedrock, and Amazon S3.

Author: Refactoring it a little so it refers to workflows rather than pipelines, but this is just semantics

If you need additional connectivity, [submit a feature request](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/analytical-platform/issues/new?template=feature-request-template.yml).

> > **Please note**: You cannot use Analytical Platform Airflow for workflows using `BashOperator` or `PythonOperator`

Author: semantics

## Concepts

> ![](images/airflow/airflow_diagram.png)

Author: Added the following image as I am very much a visual person

![airflow_diagram](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/472aef15-8be0-4dc2-94b2-e95428aa49a4)

Reviewer: I like these but how can I edit it? I want to lowercase the project and change manifest.yml to workflow.yml

Reviewer 2: I'd also recommend having this as an SVG rather than PNG - better format type for resizing and accessibility.

Author: Can't seem to share the excalidraw file on here. Will make the changes now and save as SVG

* [request Airflow access](#request-airflow-access) 
* [create a GitHub repository](#create-a-github-repository) 

> * [create a GitHub release](#create-a-github-release) 

Author: Just simple clarification

> * [create an Airflow pipeline project and workflow](#create-an-airflow-pipeline-project-and-workflow)

Author: And again

1. Create a repository using one of the provided runtime templates:

> - [Python Airflow Template](https://github.com/new?template_name=analytical-platform-airflow-python-template&template_owner=ministryofjustice)

Author: Bit more of a refactoring here to make the templates links stand out more. Markdown hates numbers, lists and code blocks so had to keep the numbering going using `2.\` etc

- [R Airflow Template](https://github.com/new?template_name=analytical-platform-airflow-r-template&template_owner=ministryofjustice)
     
  > You can create this repository in either the [`ministryofjustice`](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/) or [`moj-analytical-services`](https://github.com/moj-analytical-services/) GitHub organisation
  >
  > Repository standards, such as branch protection, are out of scope for this guidance
  >
  > For more information on runtime templates, please refer to [runtime templates](#runtime-templates)

2\. Add your code to the repository, including the script(s) your want Airflow to run and a file for your package management

> 3\. Update the `Dockerfile` instructions to copy your code into the image, install packages required to run, and call the script(s) to run. For example, for Python:

Author: Thought it might be a good example to add it here rather than get people to go to a separate link to find an example?

```Dockerfile
FROM ghcr.io/ministryofjustice/analytical-platform-airflow-python-base:1.7.0@sha256:5de4dfa5a59c219789293f843d832b9939fb0beb65ed456c241b21928b6b8f59

USER root

COPY requirements.txt requirements.txt
COPY src/ .
RUN pip install -r requirements.txt

USER ${CONTAINER_UID}

ENTRYPOINT ["python3", "main.py"]
```

  > For more information on runtime images, please refer to [runtime images](#runtime-images)

### Create a GitHub release

1. Follow GitHub's documentation on [creating a release](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/releasing-projects-on-github/managing-releases-in-a-repository#creating-a-release). Make note of the release tag.

1. After you've created a release, check if your container image has been successfully built and published by [logging in to the Analytical Platform Common Production AWS account](https://moj.awsapps.com/start/#/console?account_id=509399598587&role_name=modernisation-platform-mwaa-user&destination=https%3A%2F%2Feu-west-2.console.aws.amazon.com%2Fecr%2Fprivate-registry%2Frepositories%3Fregion%3Deu-west-2)

> > You can also see [our example Python repository](https://github.com/moj-analytical-services/analytical-platform-airflow-python-example).

Author: Just clarifying it's a Python one

> ### Create an Airflow pipeline project and workflow

Author: Added clarity as per above when first cited

To initialise an [Airflow pipeline project](#concepts), create a directory in the [relevant environment in the Airflow repository](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/analytical-platform-airflow/tree/main/environments), for example, `environments/development/analytical-platform`.

To create a [Airflow pipeline workflow](#concepts) (a DAG), you need to provide a workflow manifest (`workflow.yml`) file in your project under a workflow identifier name.

> This manifest file specifies the desired state for workflow, and provides contextual information used to categorise and label the workflow.

Author: semantics

  owner: analytical-platform@justice.gov.uk
```

- `dag.repository` is the name of the GitHub repository where your code is stored and release has been created
- `dag.tag` is the tag you used when creating the release in your GitHub repository
- `maintainers` are a list of GitHub usernames of individuals responsible for maintaining the workflow, and updating any secret values
- `tags.business_unit` **must** be one of `Central Digital`, `CICA`, `HMCTS`, `HMPPS`, `HQ`, `LAA`, `OPG`, `Platforms`, `Technology Services`
- `tags.owner` must be an email address ending with `@justice.gov.uk`

> > Providing a `tags.business_unit` other than `Central Digital`, `CICA`, `HMCTS`, `HMPPS`, `HQ`, `LAA`, `OPG`, `Platforms`, `Technology Services` will result in an error.

Author: I fell foul of this, so thought we could make clearer?

- `schedule`: [cron expression](https://crontab.guru/) that defines how often the workflow runs (defaults to `null`)
- `start_date`: the timestamp (`YYYY-MM-DD`) from which the scheduler will attempt to backfill (defaults to `2025-01-01`)

> The [`example-schedule` workflow](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/analytical-platform-airflow/blob/main/environments/development/analytical-platform/example-schedule/workflow.yml) shows an example of a workflow that runs at 08:00 every day and retries 3 times, with a 150 second delay between each retry:

Author: Context added

  repository: moj-analytical-services/analytical-platform-airflow-python-example
  tag: 2.0.0
  env_vars:

>     x: "1"

Author: Trying to keep consistent to the multi task below where I have used diff variables (more data engineering/sciency)

- `1vcpu`: 1 vCPU is guaranteed
- `4gb`: 4GB of memory is guaranteed

In addition to the `general` fleet, we also offer `gpu`, which provides your workflow with an NVIDIA GPU pre-installed with CUDA.

The full list of available compute profiles can be found [here](https://github.com/ministryofjustice/analytical-platform-airflow/blob/main/scripts/workflow_schema_validation/schema.json#L14-L41).

> > Analytical Platform tooling (such as JupyterLab, VSCode and RStudio) tend to run on a profile similar to `general-spot-2vcpu-8gb` or `general-spot-4vcpu-16gb`; therefore, the default compute profile is smaller.

Author: Just guiding users over what to choose

> > Analytical Platform tooling (such as JupyterLab, VSCode and RStudio) tend to run on a profile similar to `general-spot-2vcpu-8gb` or `general-spot-4vcpu-16gb`; therefore, the default compute profile is smaller.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Analytical Platform tooling (such as JupyterLab, RStudio and Visual Studio Code) has access to 1 vCPU and 12GB RAM. The closest compute profile is `general-on-demand-4vcpu-16gb`.
```

### Multi-task

> ![](images/airflow/airflow_diagram_deps.png)

Author: Another image, like this:

![airflow_diagram_deps](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/290c24f2-cb4c-4a6a-b055-1c65d3de859a)

Workflows can also run multiple tasks, with dependencies on other tasks in the same workflow. To enable this, specify the `tasks` key, for example:

```yaml
dag:
  repository: moj-analytical-services/analytical-platform-airflow-python-example
  tag: 2.0.0
  env_vars:

>     x: "1"

Author: Changes below to match the diagram. Making variables a little more data engineering/sciency. Changing complexity of dependencies as previous one was very linear. Adding in two different compute profiles

The name of your workflow's role is derived from its environment, project, and workflow: `airflow-${environment}-${project}-${workflow}`.

> To extend the permissions of your workflow's IAM policy to include access to Athena, Bedrock, Glue, KMS ARNs and/or S3 buckets, you can do so under the top-level `iam` key in your workflow manifest, for example:

Author: Added clarity

```bash
SECRET_USERNAME=xxxxxx
SECRET_PASSWORD=yyyyyy

> SECRET_API_KEY=zzzzzz

Author: Added this because it shows the conversion from - to _ as explained in the text

```

Secret names with hyphens (`-`) will be converted to use underscores (`_`) for the environment variable.

### Updating a secret value

> Secrets are initially created with a placeholder value. To update this, your GitHub username must be listed in the `maintainers` section of the [workflow manifest file](#create-an-airflow-pipeline-project-and-workflow), and then [log in to the Analytical Platform Data Production AWS account](https://moj.awsapps.com/start/#/console?account_id=593291632749&role_name=modernisation-platform-mwaa-user&destination=https%3A%2F%2Feu-west-2.console.aws.amazon.com%2Fsecretsmanager%2Flistsecrets%3Fregion%3Deu-west-2%26search%3Dall%253D%25252Fairflow%25252F) and update the value.

Author: Clarifying where this is
